---
layout: post
title: "Essential Vim Tips for Boosting Productivity"
subtitle: "A Comprehensive Guide for Customizing Vim and Streamlining Your Workflow"
date: 2023-04-16
author: "MAI Minh"
header-img: "img/"
header-style: text
tags: [vim, ide]
catalog: true
permalink: /distilled/ide/vim.html
# katex: true
mathjax: true
---
<!-- <b>Last modified: <script>document.write( document.lastModified );</script> -->

### Introduction

Vim is a powerful text editor that can help improve your productivity and streamline your workflow by **maximizing keyboard shortcuts** and **eliminating mouse usage**. In this blog post, we will cover some useful tips and tricks that can help you get the most out of Vim.

### The 3 modes of vim

Vim has three modes:
- **INSERT**: used for inserting and editing text.
- **VISUAL**: used for selecting and manipulating text.
- **NORMAL**: the default mode and used for navigating and executing commands.

Switching between modes by pressing the appropriate key:
- Press `i` to switch to **INSERT** mode.
- Press `v` to switch to **VISUAL** mode.
- Press `V` to switch to **VISUAL LINE** mode (select row instead of select word like VISUAL).
- Press `Esc` to switch to **NORMAL** mode.

### Navigation

#### Navigation in a directory

In Vim, you can Navigate through a directory using the arrow keys &larr; &uarr; &darr; &rarr; or the "H, K, J and L" buttons.
- Pressing `../` to return to the parent directory.
- Typing `:R` to return from a file to its directory.
- Executing command by `:!<cmd>`.

```vim
" ============================================================================                                                                                               
" Netrw Directory Listing                                        (netrw v156)
"   /home/maiminh/programming/thread
"   Sorted by      name
"   Sort sequence: [\/]$,\<core\%(\.\d\+\)\=\>,\.h$,\.c$,\.cpp$,\~\=\*$,*,\.o$,\.obj$,\.info$,\.swp$,\.bak$,\~$
"   Quick Help: <F1>:help  -:go up dir  D:delete  R:rename  s:sort-by  x:special
" ==============================================================================
../
./
__pycache__/
hello_thread.py
multiprocess.py
~
~
~
thread   [RO]   12,2   All
:!python3 thread/hello_thread.py

<_MainProcess(MainProcess, started)>
Downloaded 1256 bytes from http://example.org
<_MainProcess(MainProcess, started)>
Downloaded 1256 bytes from http://example.net
<_MainProcess(MainProcess, started)>
Downloaded 1256 bytes from http://example.com
<_MainProcess(MainProcess, started)>
Downloaded 1256 bytes from http://example.net
<_MainProcess(MainProcess, started)>
Downloaded 1256 bytes from http://example.net
<_MainProcess(MainProcess, started)>
Downloaded 1256 bytes from http://example.net
time:  0.24037432670593262
Press ENTER or type command to continue         
```

#### Navigation in a file
In Vim, you can navigate through a file using the arrow keys &larr; &uarr; &darr; &rarr;  or the "H, K, J and L" buttons. To go to a specific line number (for example, line 15), type `:15`.

### Editing documents

To insert text at the current cursor position, press `i`. To insert text after the current cursor position, press `a`.

Here are some other useful commands for editing documents in Vim:
- `Y`: Copy a line of text to the buffer.
- `P`: Paste the contents of the buffer after the current cursor position.
- `dd`: Delete a line of text and place it in the buffer.
- `yy`: Copy a line of text to the buffer.

To copy or delete multiple lines of text, move the cursor to the beginning of where you'd like to copy or delete. Then, press `:` to bring up the command line at the bottom of the Vim window. To copy, type `y` followed by the number of lines you want to copy. For example, to copy four lines of text, type `y4`. To delete, type `d` followed by the number of lines you want to delete. For example, to delete four lines of text, type `d4`.

### Search and replace

You can use Vim to search and replace text in your document. 
- To replace text in all lines, type `:%s/text2search/text2replace/g`. 
- To replace text in a specific line, type `:s/text2search/text2replace/g`. 
- To search for a specific word without replacing, type `:/text2search`.

### Undo and redo

You can undo changes in Vim by typing `:u` or pressing `Ctrl-r` to redo changes.

### Saving work

- `:w`: to save changes
- `:wq` or `ZZ`: to save changes and quit
- `:q!`: to force quit without saving changes

### Customizing vim settings

You can customize your Vim settings by editing your `.vimrc` file. Here is an example `.vimrc` file:
```vim
" enable syntax highlighting\n
syntax enable\n
" show line numbers\n
set number\n
" set tabs to have 4 spaces
set ts=4
" indent when moving to the next line while writing code
set autoindent
" expand tabs into spaces
set expandtab
" when using the >> or << commands, shift lines by 4 spaces
set shiftwidth=4
" show a visual line under the cursor's current line
set cursorline
" show the matching part of the pair for [] {} and ()
set showmatch
" enable all Python syntax highlighting features
let python_highlight_all = 1
```
Then sourcing it,
```bash
$ source ~/.vimrc
```
or, during normal mode, type `:set number` to show number.

### Editing files remotely

Vim also supports editing files remotely, which can be useful if you need to work on a file located on a remote server. This can be done via FTP or SSH, for example. To edit a remote file over FTP, use the following syntax:
```bash
$ vim ftp://<username>@<hostname>/<path_to_file>
```
For example, to edit a file named test.txt located in the home directory of a user named jane on a server with IP address 192.168.1.100, you could use the following command:
```bash
$ vim ftp://jane@192.168.1.100/home/jane/test.txt
```
You will be prompted for a password if necessary.

### Conclusion

In conclusion, Vim is a powerful text editor with many features and capabilities. It can take some time to learn, but with practice, it can greatly improve your productivity and efficiency as a developer or writer. By familiarizing yourself with Vim's various modes, navigation and editing commands, search and replace functionality, undo/redo, saving files, syntax highlighting, and even remote file editing, you can make the most of this versatile tool.

Finally, if you want to manage [Vim plugins](https://github.com/VundleVim/Vundle.vim), you can use a plugin manager like Vundle. It simplifies the process of installing, updating, and removing plugins, and allows you to easily try out new plugins without cluttering up your Vim configuration.

### References

1. <https://www.vim.org/>